.TH JFC 1 "2026-06-22" "jfc" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
jfc \- format JSON, TOML, YAML, Markdown, JSONL, JSONC, and experimental XML, CSV, TSV, dotenv, and HCL
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B jfc
[\fB--version\fR]
.br
.B jfc
[\fB--write\fR | \fB--check\fR [\fB--diff\fR] | \fB--diff\fR | \fB--list-different\fR]
[\fB--config\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB--stdin-filepath\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fIFILE\fR ...]
.br
.B jfc init
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B jfc
means either "jesus fucking christ" or "just format correctly".
It is a single-binary formatter for JSON, TOML, YAML, Markdown, JSONL, JSONC, and experimental XML, CSV, TSV, dotenv, and HCL.
Point it at one of those files, stdin, or a repo tree, and get predictable formatting without remembering separate tools for those formats.
Its scope is format-first, not purpose-first: files do not need to be configuration files to be formatted.
Its strongest structured layout controls are for JSON-family files.
TOML is validated and safely normalized without losing comments or order.
Markdown is treated as a safe whitespace normalizer, not a prose rewriter.
.PP
Supported formats are JSON, JSONC, JSONL, YAML, TOML, Markdown, and experimental XML, CSV, TSV, dotenv, and HCL.
When no file arguments are provided, or when a lone
.B -
is passed, input is read from standard input.
Stdin defaults to JSON unless
.B --stdin-filepath
is provided.
.PP
Directories are traversed recursively.
Unsupported files found during directory traversal are skipped.
Paths matched by
.B ignore
patterns in
.B jfc.toml
are also skipped.
Paths matched by standard ignore sources such as
.BR .ignore ,
.BR .gitignore ,
and
.B .git/info/exclude
are skipped as well.
Explicit unsupported file arguments are rejected.
.PP
Directory traversal does not follow symlinked directories or symlinked files.
Explicit symlinked file arguments are accepted when the link path has a supported extension and the target is a file.
When
.B --write
formats an explicit symlinked file, the target file is updated and the symlink itself is preserved.
Other hidden, generated, vendor, or build directories are not skipped unless they are unsupported by file extension or named
.BR .git .
.SH SUPPORTED FORMATS
.TP
.B JSON
.I .json
.TP
.B JSONC
.I .jsonc
,
formatted through
.BR hujson .
.TP
.B JSONL
.I .jsonl, .ndjson
.TP
.B YAML
.I .yaml, .yml
,
formatted through
.BR yaml.v3 .
.TP
.B TOML
.I .toml
.TP
.B Markdown
.I .md, .markdown
.TP
.B XML
.I .xml, .svg, .plist, .xib, .storyboard, .csproj, .vbproj, .fsproj, .props, .targets, .pom
,
experimental.
.TP
.B CSV
.I .csv
,
experimental validate-only support.
.TP
.B TSV
.I .tsv
,
experimental validate-only support.
.TP
.B dotenv
.I .env, .env.*, *.env
,
experimental common assignment normalization.
.TP
.B HCL
.I .hcl, .tf, .tfvars, .nomad
,
experimental formatting through HashiCorp HCL tooling.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --write
Format matching files in place.
This option cannot be used with stdin.
.TP
.B --check
Print files whose formatted output differs from the current contents and exit with status 1 when any differ.
.TP
.B --diff
Print formatting changes as a unified diff and exit with status 1 when any differ.
May be used alone or with
.BR --check .
.TP
.B --list-different
Print files whose formatted output differs from the current contents and exit with status 1 when any differ.
.TP
.B --config PATH
Load configuration from the specified
.B jfc.toml
file instead of walking upward from each target file or stdin path.
.TP
.B --stdin-filepath PATH
Resolve stdin configuration and format selection as if the input originated from
.IR PATH .
.TP
.B --version
Print the
.B jfc
version.
.TP
.B --help
Show usage information.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init
Create a minimal
.B jfc.toml
in the current directory.
The generated config contains only:
.IP
.EX
ignore = ["dist", "vendor", "node_modules", "*.generated.*"]
.EE
.IP
.B init
refuses to overwrite an existing config.
Jfc-specific ignore patterns live in
.BR jfc.toml ;
there is no separate
.B .jfcignore
file.
Standard external ignore sources such as
.BR .ignore ,
.BR .gitignore ,
and
.B .git/info/exclude
are also respected.
.SH CONFIGURATION
By default,
.B jfc
looks for
.B jfc.toml
starting from the file being formatted and walking upward toward the filesystem root.
Discovery is nearest-file wins: each target uses the closest
.B jfc.toml
in its own directory or an ancestor directory.
Config files do not merge.
If a repository has
.BR Z/jfc.toml ,
.BR Z/A/jfc.toml ,
and
.BR Z/B/jfc.toml ,
files under
.B Z/A
use
.BR Z/A/jfc.toml ,
files under
.B Z/B
use
.BR Z/B/jfc.toml ,
and files under
.B Z/C
use
.BR Z/jfc.toml .
In particular, an
.B ignore
array in a nearer config replaces the parent config's jfc-specific ignore list for targets beneath it.
If stdin is used, discovery starts from the current working directory unless
.B --stdin-filepath
is provided.
.PP
Supported top-level keys:
.TP
.B use_tabs
Use hard tabs for JSON and XML indentation.
YAML and HCL always use spaces because that is the expected style for those formats.
.TP
.B tab_width
Visual width for one indent level, XML indentation, and YAML indentation spaces.
.TP
.B print_width
Target width used to decide whether JSON arrays and objects should remain inline when expansion is set to
.BR auto .
.TP
.B trailing_newline
Append a final newline when true.
.TP
.B sort_keys
Sort JSON, JSONC, and JSONL object keys lexicographically when true.
.TP
.B array_expand
JSON array layout.
One of
.BR auto ,
.BR always ,
or
.BR never .
.TP
.B object_expand
JSON object layout.
One of
.BR auto ,
.BR always ,
or
.BR never .
.TP
.B space_after_colon
Render JSON and JSONL object members as
.B "key": value
instead of
.BR "key":value .
.TP
.B space_within_braces
Add spaces just inside
.B {
and
.B }
for inline JSON and JSONL objects.
.TP
.B space_within_brackets
Add spaces just inside
.B [
and
.B ]
for inline JSON and JSONL arrays.
.TP
.B end_of_line
One of
.BR lf ,
.BR crlf ,
or
.BR cr .
.TP
.B ignore
Jfc-specific glob patterns, resolved relative to the config file, for files that
.B jfc
should skip.
Patterns without
.B /
match any path segment.
Patterns may use
.B **
for recursive matches.
.SH FORMAT NOTES
.TP
.B JSON
Uses jfc's structured renderer, preserves object key order by default, and can sort keys with
.BR sort_keys .
.TP
.B JSONC
Accepts comments and trailing commas through
.BR hujson .
Jfc can sort object keys, but JSON layout options do not fully control
.B hujson
spacing.
.TP
.B JSONL
Treats each non-empty line as one JSON value, reports line-specific parse errors, and renders records through the JSON formatter in inline mode.
.TP
.B YAML
Uses
.B yaml.v3
AST formatting.
Jfc controls indentation and output conventions but does not expose a full YAML style system.
.TP
.B TOML
Validates TOML and normalizes assignment spacing while preserving comments and order.
It does not rewrite tables, arrays, or prose in comments.
.TP
.B Markdown
Conservatively normalizes line endings, safe blank-line whitespace, and safe final-newline conventions.
It does not reflow prose or reindent code blocks.
.TP
.B XML
Experimental.
Pretty-prints element-only XML while preserving token order, element order, attribute order, empty-element spelling, comments, processing instructions, and directives.
XML containing CDATA, mixed element/text content, multiline text elements,
.BR xml:space="preserve" ,
or multiline/tabbed attributes is validated and only output conventions are applied.
.TP
.B CSV and TSV
Experimental and validate-only.
Jfc parses records to catch malformed quoting or inconsistent field counts, then preserves existing bytes except for the configured final-newline policy.
It does not canonicalize quoting, delimiter spacing, record separators, or embedded newlines.
.TP
.B dotenv
Experimental and limited to a common core: optional
.BR export ,
keys made from letters, digits after the first character, and underscores, and
.B KEY=value
assignment spacing.
Comments, blank lines, non-assignment lines, and values are preserved.
Dialect-specific interpolation and quoting rules are not interpreted.
.TP
.B HCL
Experimental.
Uses HashiCorp's HCL parser and formatter for syntax formatting.
It may format Terraform files such as
.I .tf
and
.IR .tfvars ,
but does not add Terraform project semantics.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Formatting differences were found during
.B --check
,
.B --diff
or
.BR --list-different .
.TP
.B 2
Parse, configuration, IO, or usage error.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Format a JSON file to stdout:
.B jfc package.json
.TP
Format a TOML file to stdout:
.B jfc data.toml
.TP
Rewrite one file in place:
.B jfc --write data.toml
.TP
Format Markdown stdin with Markdown inference:
.B cat README.md | jfc --stdin-filepath README.md
.TP
Rewrite files in place:
.B jfc --write .
.TP
Check formatting in CI:
.B jfc --check .
.TP
Show formatting changes in CI:
.B jfc --check --diff .
.TP
Preview formatting changes:
.B jfc --diff .
.TP
Use an explicit config:
.B jfc --config ./config/jfc.toml data/example.yaml
.TP
Install for local use or CI:
.B go install github.com/charliewilco/jfc@latest
.SH FILES
.TP
.B jfc.toml
Project-local formatter configuration.
.SH INSTALLATION
.TP
.B go install github.com/charliewilco/jfc@latest
Install from source using the Go toolchain.
Verify the installed binary with:
.B jfc --version
.TP
.B GitHub release archives
Tagged release archives contain the
.B jfc
binary and this man page for Darwin, Linux, and Windows on amd64 and arm64.
Verify downloaded archives from the release directory with:
.IP
.EX
sha256sum -c checksums.txt
.EE
.IP
or, on macOS without GNU coreutils:
.IP
.EX
shasum -a 256 -c checksums.txt
.EE
.IP
Release provenance and signing are not published yet.
Checksummed GitHub release archives and Go install are the supported distribution paths for now.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR jq (1)
